Initial draft content for parallel execution (#104)
streamingfast/substreams: docs/developer-guide/parallel-execution.md

---
description: StreamingFast Substreams parallel execution
---

# Parallel execution

> Parallel execution is the process of a Substreams module's code executing multiple segments of blockchain data simultaneously. Substreams modules are executed in parallel, rapidly producing data for consumption in end-user applications. Parallel Execution enables Substreams' highly effecient blockchain data processing capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parallel execution is the process of a Substreams module's code executing multiple segments of blockchain data simultaneously. Substreams modules can be executed in parallel, rapidly producing data for consumption in end-user applications. Parallel Execution enables Substreams' highly efficient blockchain data processing capabilities.
```

Author: These updates have been made and will be available for review in the next commit/push.

> Parallel execution occurs when a requested module's start block is further back in the blockchain's history than the requested start block. For example, if a module starts at block 12,000,000 and a user requests data at block 15,000,000, parallel execution is used. This applies to both the development and production modes of Substreams operation. Parallel execution is performed for the full range of blocks when Substreams is in production mode.

Reviewer: It can happen in two ways, the one described here but also in forward parallel execution, the first sentence gives the impression that only the former is true.

I see the last sentence of this paragraph talking about full range, but it's really not clear. I think a re-work is neeed.

Author: First sentence updated. I removed the last sentence. I do not know how to improve it.

"Parallel execution is performed for the full range of blocks when Substreams is in production mode."

Please let me know if you have any input to reword this for clarity and technical accuracy.

Thank you!

The changes will be available for review in the next commit/push.

---

> description: StreamingFast Substreams parallel Execution

Reviewer: Shouldn't be 
```suggestion
description: StreamingFast Substreams Parallel Execution
```

Author: Changed to: StreamingFast Substreams parallel execution, per the style guide. The update will be in the next commit.

---

# Parallel Execution

> In simple terms, parallel execution is the ability to pre-compute the execution of Substreams modules. In more detail, parallel execution is the process of a Substreams module's code executing multiple segments of blockchain data simultaneously. Substreams modules are executed in parallel, rapidly producing data for consumption in end-user applications.

Reviewer: `pre-compute` is not accurate enough because when doing backward parallel execution, we are not pre-computing.

Author: I've removed the initial sentence and left the rest of the content. The update will be in the next commit.

> Parallel Execution is what's responsible for making Substreams extremely fast. StreamingFast was able to use 120 concurrent workers to completely process and store all of the ERC20/ERC721/ERC1155 token transfers on the Ethereum Mainnet in nearly 45 minutes!

Reviewer: I'm quite unsure if those "marketing" like sentence have their place in the documentation. At least should be re-worded maybe we just say that full chain processing can be achieved in ~15 minutes (I was able in the past to perform a full chain processing in 15 minutes).

Or we eliminate it completely.

Reviewer: I'm talking specifically about `StreamingFast was able to use 120 concurrent workers to completely process and store all of the ERC20/ERC721/ERC1155 token transfers on the Ethereum Mainnet in nearly 45 minutes!`. So with the first sentence, I think we should still say something about ability to fully process chain in minutes or something like that.

Author: Yes, this is correct. Per the style guide, we should not include any marketing in the documentation. In addition, we are **NOT** to use words like easy, fast, quick, etc.

This sentence has been removed. The update will be in the next commit.

The server will define an execution schedule and take the module's dependencies into consideration. The server's execution schedule is a list of pairs of (`module, range`), where range contains `N` blocks. This is a configurable value set to 25K blocks, on the server.

The single map_transfer module will fulfill a request from 0 - 75,000. The server's execution plan returns the results of `[(map_transfer, 0 -> 24,999), (map_transfer, 25,000 -> 74,999), (map_transfer, 50,000 -> 74,999)]`.

The three pairs will be simultaneously executed by the server handling caching of the output of the store. For stores, an additional step will combine the store keys across multiple segments producing a unified and linear view of the store's state.

> The Ethereum Mainnet consists of roughly 16,000,000 blocks translating to 640 segments of 25K blocks. The server currently accepts a limited amount of concurrency. In theory, 640 concurrent workers could be spanned, in practice, it depends on the capabilities of the service provider StreamingFast sets the concurrency to 15 for the production endpoint producing fair usage of resources for the free service.

Reviewer: Let's be agnostic of a specific chain and let's just say `Assuming a chain that has 16,000,000 blocks`, it translates to ...` something like this.

Reviewer: ```
... it depends on the capabilities of the service provider StreamingFast ...
``` 

Seems it's missing a `.` here?

Author: Updates made and will be available in the next commit.

> Parallel execution occurs when a requested module's start block is further back in the blockchain's history than the requested start block. For example, if a module starts at block 12,000,000 and a user requests data at block 15,000,000, parallel execution is used. This applies to both the development and production modes of Substreams operation; parallel execution is performed for the full range of blocks when Substreams is in production mode.

Reviewer: I've change my mind a bit, let's use `Backward parallel execution` to discuss about this. Let's also add a paragraph to quickly explain `Forward parallel execution`.

Author: Please review the latest commit addressing all other change requests for this PR. Part of the content referenced here has now been moved, per request.

Please let me know if these are subtitle/headers you would like to add to the existing content or new sections. If they are new sections please help locate or provide content for them.

Reviewer: I've commented back in the my follow-up review.

> Parallel execution addresses the problem of the slow single linear execution of a module. Instead of running a module in a linear fashion, one block after the other without leveraging full computing power, we execute N workers over a different segment of the chain. It means we are able to push data back to the user N times faster than if we had 1 worker.

Reviewer: Feels this should be much higher in the document, feels weird at the end like that.

Author: Content moved directly below the original first paragraph. Changes will be available in the next commit.

The server will define an execution schedule and take the module's dependencies into consideration. The server's execution schedule is a list of pairs of (`module, range`), where range contains `N` blocks. This is a configurable value set to 25K blocks, on the server.

The single map_transfer module will fulfill a request from 0 - 75,000. The server's execution plan returns the results of `[(map_transfer, 0 -> 24,999), (map_transfer, 25,000 -> 74,999), (map_transfer, 50,000 -> 74,999)]`.

The three pairs will be simultaneously executed by the server handling caching of the output of the store. For stores, an additional step will combine the store keys across multiple segments producing a unified and linear view of the store's state.

Assuming a chain has 16,000,000 blocks, which translates to 640 segments of 25K blocks. The server currently has a limited amount of concurrency. In theory, 640 concurrent workers could be spawned. In practice, the number of concurrent workers depends on the capabilities of the service provider. For the production endpoint, StreamingFast sets the concurrency to 15 to ensure fair usage of resources for the free service.

> ## Production versus development mode for parallel execution diagram

Reviewer: Don't `diagram` is needed at the end.

Author: This has been updated and will be available for review in the next commit/push.

> The amount of parallel processing for the two modes is illustrated in the diagram. Production mode results in more parallel processing than development mode for the requested range. In contrast, development mode consists of more linear processing. Another important note is, forward processing only occurs in production mode.

Reviewer: `Parallel processing` -> `Parallel execution`, `forward processing` -> `foward parallel execution`

Author: This has been updated and will be available for review in the next commit/push.
